Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Rearton, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
Christ is risen.
The reading is from the Acts of the Apostles.
Then came Paul to Derbe in Lystra.
A behold, a certain disciple was there named Timothy, the son of a certain woman who was a Jewish and believed, but his father was a Greek.
He was well reported of by the brethren that were in Lystra in Iconium.
Him would Paul have to go forth with him
and took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those quarters.
They all knew that his father was a Greek.
And as they went through the cities, they delivered their decrees for to keep.
They were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem.
And so were the churches established in the faith.
It increased in numbers daily.
Now, when they had gone through Phrygia and the region of Galatia and were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to preach the word in Asia, after they were come to Misia, they endeavored to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not.
and passing by Messiah came down to Tross.
And a vision appeared to Paul in the night.
There stood a man of Macedonia and prayed him saying, come over into Macedonia and help us.
And after he had seen the vision,
Immediately we endeavored to go into Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the gospel unto them.
Therefore, loosing from Tarras, we came with a straight course to Samothrace and the next day to Neapolis and from thence to Philippi, which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia.
and a colony, and they were in that city abiding certain days.
This is the word of the Lord.
Now, beloved, if we leave out the Macedonian who appears in the vision of the dream,
There are four characters in the reading we just heard.
Everybody with me?
You caught that while we were reading it, did you?
The apostle Paul himself.
And I had to put his name in, because the text simply says he.
Apostle Paul himself was beginning his second missionary journey.
He talks about the decrees of the apostles that you have from the Council of Jerusalem, previous chapter in chapter 15.
Second, there is the Apostle Silas.
Also not named.
But he's part of the they.
In the previous chapter, Silas had been described as a prophet sent by the Council of Jerusalem to be Paul's companion on his return to Antioch.
At Antioch, Silas joined the missionary team.
And that's all in chapter 15 of the book of Acts.
That's why I know that Silas is with him.
Now, as you read this passage tonight,
We were told several times that the Holy Spirit spoke to Paul, giving him instructions about his journey.
We learned, for instance, that this little missionary group were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to preach the word in Asia.
Holy Spirit said, no.
That is to say, they were told not to go south.
Next, it says,
After they had come to Missia, they tried to go into Bethenia, but the Spirit did not permit them.
That is to say, the Holy Spirit did not permit them to go north.
Now, since these missionaries had just come from the southeast, they decided to try going northwest.
This time, the Holy Spirit did not see anything.
Now here's my question.
How did the Holy Spirit give all these directions?
I mean, was the Holy Spirit a sort of GPS system?
Actually, from what I've told you so far in the sermon tonight, you should suspect what the answer is.
One of these men, Silas,
has already been introduced as a prophet.
Very simple.
If you have a functional prophet in your midst, you get a real leg up on the problem.
The Holy Spirit is speaking through Silas.
He is the one with the gift of prophecy.
Now the third character in tonight's reading is names.
He's a young convert, a Jew on his mother's side, like Jesus.
I thought that was kind of humorous.
A Jew on his mother's side named Timothy.
We know that his mother's name was Eunice.
Eunice, as grandmother's name was.
Lois, very good.
I knew there'd be, you know, the mothers and grandmothers in the congregation would know.
He was raised in a household of faith.
Timothy joins the missionary team in tonight's reading.
There's a fourth person in tonight's story, however, who is not named.
He is the narrator.
Observe a curious and important detail of the story.
I'm going to read you part of it again.
At least I'll look at the relevant verses, listening closely to the text.
Now, when they had gone through Phrygia and the region of Galicia,
They were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to preach the word in Asia.
After they had come to Messia, they tried to go into Bethany, but the Holy Spirit did not permit them.
So passing by Messia, they came down to Troas.
And a vision appeared to Paul in the night
A man of Macedonia stood and pleaded with him saying, come over to Macedonia and help us.
Now, after he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the gospel to them.
See the dramatic shift in one verse.
He went from they and them to we and us.
It tells you that the author is now with them.
The author is going to be with them.
Let me just mention the passing through the ministry in Philippi, where we lose track of him.
That's because he will stay in Philippi until chapter 20, chapter 20, verse six.
We observe that the voice of the narrator shifts to the first person plural.
The author of this story has now become an actor within the story.
St. Luke has now joined Paul's missionary team at Truas.
I'm not telling you anything.
You wouldn't have gotten out of almost any commentary on acts, including
Probably the footnotes in your Orthodox study Bible would have pointed that out to you.
Let me observe in passing that two New Testament authors are in this story.
Paul and Luke, now together for the first time.
These two men account for the authorship of more than half of the New Testament.
These two men.
Now tonight, I want to draw a particular attention to Luke to suggest the significance of his joining the missionary team in the region of Tros.
The things I'm going to tell you now, I don't think you're going to find in any commentary on the Book of Acts.
I can't think of anybody else who's ever drawn attention to it, but it's there.
It's there.
It would be surprising to me if I sat down and dissected an angle and then discovered that nobody had ever done it before.
Would I have self-doubt?
No, I wouldn't, because it has a certainty of mathematics to it.
This has just raw certainty to it.
I'm not in any doubt.
Now, the geography of this place needs to be studied on a map.
But let me describe it to you anyway.
It's chiefly formed troughs.
It's chiefly formed of the Northwestern extension of Anatolia, we call that the Turkish Peninsula now, into the Aegean Sea, extending on the south from the Gulf of Edirmit
the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles on the North.
The Trood Peninsula, or Troos as it's called tonight, was the region of the ancient city of Troy, also known in antiquity as Elion in Greek, as Elium in Latin.
The ruins of Ilium are situated at the border between Asia and Europe.
You see what we have tonight is the passage of the gospel from Asia into Europe.
That's what Luke is getting at.
Now the site of the city is surrounded by the Karimendi's
for in the Caramanderese River, known in antiquity as the Scamander.
It comes down from the springs of Mount Ida.
Because you remember, he says in the night, we went down to Trois.
They were marching north, but they went down to Trois.
He's not marching onto a map, he's marching on the earth.
Come down from Mount Ida.
This commander coming down from Mount Ida then empties into the Hellespont just before the Hellespont flows into the Aegean.
Now many layers of archeological ruins at the site of ancient Troy attested the significance of this prized location.
And Troy's momentous fall to the Greeks
became enshrined in the memory of both Europe and Asia through Homer's Iliad.
This was as well known, the story is as well known in Persia as it was in Greece.
And I can prove that.
Much of tonight's reading, including Paul's dream, hang on to Paul's dream, happened in exactly that place.
As a man of classical learning, St. Luke was aware of all these things.
If we date the events in tonight's story in the early summer of the year 49, then they happen exactly 530 years after the largest army in history arrived at that same site
in 480 BC.
I had to destroy about three pages of notes, because I wanted to give you a description of that army.
But that's for another time.
The largest army in history up to that point, right there in 480 BC.
Now, this is well known.
I knew this by at least age 10.
Just some things my parents told me from school.
The army in question was on its way from distant Persia, and a few days later would cross over into Europe for a series of spectacular battles, nearly all of which the Persians would lose.
The army paused briefly, however, at the ruins of Troy.
How brief?
Herodotus covers it in two sentences.
The physician Luke, the first Christian historian, and arguably the most cultured writer in the New Testament, was aware of that older story.
Luke knew the account in book seven of the histories of Herodotus.
Don't read Herodotus before you go to bed at night.
It's so exciting you'll never get to sleep.
But I was reading this story several nights back and brought me immense joy.
These few lines in Herodotus are about as brief as Luke's account of the dream.
I add them into the night sermon.
Here's what Herodotus wrote.
When the army came to the river Scamander, which fell short of their needs, it was not sufficient for the army and the cattle to drink.
Save that for another time.
Arriving at this river,
Xerxes climbed to the citadel of Priam, having a longing to see it.
The word he uses there is hemeron, hemeron, having a longing.
I checked several translations, they put down desire.
There's much more than that in Greek.
Xerxes wanted to see
the Citadel, the Fortress of Priam in the ruins of Troy.
After he saw it and inquired about everything there, he sacrificed a thousand cattle to Athena of Ilium and the Magi poured libations to the heroes.
Now these few sentences are steeped in cultural memory and full of poetic pathos.
Having inspected the ruins of Priam's palace, the Persian emperor offers a massive sacrifice to the goddess Athena, the patroness of Ilium.
And then the Persian priests
called Mejai.
Poor libations of wine on the tombs of Hector, Patroclus, Priam, Achilles, and the other fallen warriors who perished to Troy.
And then Xerxes army marched north and west to cross
from Asia into Europe.
Does that have anything to do with the nitrating?
I think it has everything to do with the nitrating.
Among the motives for Xerxes's invasion, Herodotus tells us of a series of dreams that prompted the emperor to believe he was instructed by the Persian god
Ahura Mazda to go and conquer the Greeks, who had defeated his father Darius 10 years earlier at the Battle of Marathon.
That is to say, Xerxes believed that he had received in dreams divine instruction to go over and invade Europe.
And this is found, this idea is also found on inscriptions in Persia.
Now tonight, in the book of Acts, the apostle Paul also receives a dream.
And on the basis of that dream, he crosses over from Asia to bring the Gospels to the peoples of Europe.
beginning with the Macedonians.
Unlike Xerxes, Paul and his companions travel over by sea.
Did you notice that tonight, the journey took two days, all in one verse.
It went from Troas to Thamelthorace, from Thamelthorace to Neanderthals.
two days.
Later on, and this is just a parenthesis, later on in chapter 20, when he goes back the other way, it takes him seven days, which is why he arrives late.
He's trying to get down to Jerusalem by Pentecost.
He arrives late.
Why do you think it took him two days to go this way and seven days to go the other way?
The Dardanelles.
The water's flowing this way.
Why does the water flow from the Black Sea into the Mediterranean Sea?
It's further south.
It's warmer.
Evaporates more quickly.
That's why the water in the Mediterranean Sea and the GNC is much warmer than it is in the Black Sea.
But that's beside the point.
Is there anything we could take away from tonight's reflections?
It's a practical,
use.
I think so.
It would be a sensitivity to the Holy Spirit and a recognition that we'll end up doing God's will if we pursue it.
We'll end up
doing God's will, but it's very likely that the Holy Spirit will begin by closing doors, shutting down.
We will try to do something persuaded as God's will, and the Holy Spirit will make it impossible.
If we believe that we are governed by the Spirit of God, and St. Paul in Romans 8 says that all those
Children of God are led by the Spirit.
If we believe we are governed by the Holy Spirit, He closes doors to us.
He shuts off paths we would rather walk.
Our task is not to be discouraged by that.
Just keep going in the direction He didn't tell us to go.
Sometimes that's all that's left.
And God willed in his guidance of us, occasionally do exactly that.
Let us find a way after he closes off other ways.
Paul and his companions do that tonight.
St. Luke is well aware of the relationship between Xerxes and what they're doing in Xerxes's army.
He knew all about the dreams of Xerxes.
He knew all about Xerxes coming to this precise place and offering sacrifice to Athena.
Xerxes was on a religious mission.
He thought himself on a religious mission sent by Persian God.
It didn't work out.
He was defeated, soundly defeated the battle of Salamis and the battle of Plataea.
The Greeks demolished his immense army.
The ministry of Paul and his companions
is the peace of the gospel.
Xerxes was not able to conquer Europe.
The gospel was.
Amen.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.